Blog post for docfind (#9223)
Microsoft/vscode-docs: blogs/2026/01/07/docfind.md

But how could we get these document keywords? And wouldn't this just create a very large index file, given all the strings would need to be in memory? Could we use compression to create the smallest possible index? This led me to two more pieces of the puzzle:

- **[RAKE](https://docs.rs/rake/latest/rake/)** (Rapid Automatic Keyword Extraction): An algorithm for extracting meaningful keywords and phrases from text. Feed it a document, and it returns keywords ranked by importance.
- **[FSST](https://docs.rs/fsst-rs/latest/fsst/index.html)** (Fast Static Symbol Table): A compression algorithm optimized for short strings. Since we'd need to store document titles, categories, and snippets in memory, compression would help keep the index small.

With FST for fast keyword lookup, RAKE for keyword extraction, and FSST for string compression, I had the technical foundations. Now I just needed to build it — in Rust, a language I'm not particularly experienced with, during the limited time I could carve out from my day job.

## The solution: A standalone CLI tool

> 

Reviewer: I'm still somewhat missing the system overview: docfind CLI running in our website build pipeline to generate the WASM. The WASM is part of the website artifacts and is downloaded in the browser, where it's connected to the UI.

I ended up creating a single CLI tool, docfind, meant to create an index file out of a collection of documents. That index file should then be served to our website customers via regular HTTP and empower the search functionality. Users of the CLI tool shouldn't need any extenal dependencies other than docfind itself, in order to create index files.

> Here's an diagram of how docfind transforms a collection of documents (`documents.json`) into the respective index file (`docfind_bg.wasm`):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here's a diagram of how docfind transforms a collection of documents (`documents.json`) into the respective index file (`docfind_bg.wasm`):
```

So what happens client-side? When the user types a query, the WASM module is loaded to memory (containing both the code and the index) to execute that query as a search operation by going through the with FST data structure. We've found useful to use a [Levenshtein automaton](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Levenshtein_automaton) (for typo tolerance) and prefix matching, to get a better experience. Finally, results are produced by combining scores from multiple matching keywords, decompressing the relevant document strings on demand, and returning ranked results as JavaScript objects.

## The challenge: Patching the WASM library

The trickiest part of this project wasn't the search algorithm or the keyword extraction — it was embedding the index into the WebAssembly binary.

> The naive approach would be to use Rust's `include_bytes!` macro to bake the index into the WASM at compile time. But that would mean recompiling the WASM module every time the documentation changes. Instead, I wanted a pre-compiled WASM "template" that the CLI tool could patch with any index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The naive approach would be to use Rust's `include_bytes!` macro to bake the index into the WASM at compile-time. But that would mean recompiling the WASM module every time the documentation changes. Instead, I wanted a pre-compiled WASM "template" that the CLI tool could patch with an updated index.
```

        Index::from_bytes(raw_index).expect("Failed to deserialize index")
    });
    // ... perform search
}
```

The CLI tool scans the WASM binary's export section to find these globals, reads the global section to get their memory addresses, then patches the data segment that contains those `0xdead_beef` values with the actual index base address and length:

```rust
// Patch the data if it contains the INDEX_BASE or INDEX_LEN addresses
if index_base_global_address >= &start && index_base_global_address < &end {
    data[base_relative_offset..base_relative_offset + 4]
        .copy_from_slice(&(index_base as i32).to_le_bytes());
    data[length_relative_offset..length_relative_offset + 4]
        .copy_from_slice(&(raw_index.len() as i32).to_le_bytes());
}

// Add index as new data segment
data_section.active(
    0,
    &ConstExpr::i32_const(index_base as i32),
    raw_index.iter().copied(),
);
```

This was, to put it mildly, not straightforward. Understanding the WASM binary format, figuring out how globals are stored and referenced, calculating memory offsets—these are the kinds of problems that can easily derail a side project.

## The breakthrough: Copilot as an enabler

> I have to be honest, it's unlikely that I would have finished this project without [Copilot Agent](https://code.visualstudio.com/docs/copilot/agents/overview). As a manager who doesn't code daily anymore, tackling a project in Rust—a language known for its steep learning curve—was ambitious. I'm not a Rust expert. I don't have the muscle memory for the borrow checker. And I certainly didn't have deep knowledge of the WebAssembly binary format.

Reviewer 2: This is the lede - we should make this part of the subject and hoist to the top. Something like, "Solving hard problems with AI means understanding them first".

---
Order: 122
TOCTitle: "Building docfind"

> PageTitle: "Building docfind: Fast Client-Side Search with Rust and WebAssembly"

Reviewer: Yep! All good
